# Unofficial Hexagn Document - 1 - Introduction
# About Hexagn
Hexagn is a simple programming language that compiles to URCL.
This make Hexagn very portable, since lots of transpilers and emulaters for URCL is made already.

You can even run Hexagn programs in Minecraft CPUs if it has enough bits, memory and etc.

## File Extention
filename.hxgn

## Compilers
There is a C++ one and Rust one.
C++ one is the original compiler but lacks some features that Rust compiler has.

This document is mainly targetted the **C++** one.

# Getting Started
## Get the compiler
1. Install required softwares
	- Windows
		- [TDM-GCC Toolchain](https://jmeubank.github.io/tdm-gcc/download/)
	- Linux
		- [GCC and Build-Essential](https://linuxize.com/post/how-to-install-gcc-compiler-on-ubuntu-18-04/)
	- MacOS
		- GCC
		- Make
2. Install Hexagn Compiler
	1. [Download source code](https://github.com/emm312/Hexagn/archive/refs/heads/AST.zip)
	2. Extract it to anywhere
	3. Build Hexagn
		- Windows
			1. Download the [Hexagn Installer](../res/hexagninstaller.exe) and open it.
			2. Wait for it to say `Installed Hexagn!`, now you can close it.
		- Linux and MacOS
			1. Open Terminal.
			2. Use `cd` to go to where you extracted.
			3. Run `make`.
			4. Wait.
	4. Check is Hexagn is properly compiled by `hexagn --version`

If you did all the process correctly, Hexagn should be installed

## Start using Hexagn
Let's start off by making Hello World.
1. Open any file editor
	- On Windows you can use Notepad
	- On Linux you can use GNU Nano
	- On MacOS you can use TextEdit
2. Paste this code to a file in where Hexagn compiler is
	```c
	import io;
	int32 main() {
    	println("Hello, World!");
	}
	```
3. Compiling
	1. Go to where you stored the code in Terminal / CMD
	2. Compile it by `hexagn your-file-name.hxgn -o the-output-file.urcl`
4. Running
	1. Open the output file
	2. Copy the code to [the URCX emulater](https://bramotte.github.io/urcl-explorer)
	3. Click "Compile and Run" button

[Back to Table of Content](index.html)